---
layout: post
title: "Pairing up"
description: ""
category:
tags: []
date: 2013-03-16 13:37:38 -0700
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Last week it seemed to me that something had been going awry in our
pair challenges. I felt that our lack of pairing had left us somewhat
unpracticed in team development. I thought maybe we had been
concentrating on getting our hands-on coding. I mentioned it to Chuck
and he assured me that this was probably okay, at least for the
beginning of the course. But he challenged me to spend this week
pairing with others and letting them lead.

<!-- more -->

So that's what I did, with the exception of working on the mail code
for our team project, I tried to work with others in the class. We
worked on our Cards Against Humanity game, modeling it in the database
and learning how to set it up in Rails, and I looked over the
shoulder. Here are the challenges I faced:

<dl> 
<dt>Backseat driving</dt> 

<dd>This is when you want to take over but can't, so you overspecify,
and generally micromanage. The goal of pair programming is to be an
auxillary, or supplemental brain, not the only one.</dd>

<dt>&ldquo;I'll work on this thing.&rdquo;</dt>

<dd>This is when you get distracted with some research project, or
other task, and the pair basically splits in two. Sure, sometimes you
have to divide and conquer, but sometimes, divided, you fall.</dd>

<dt>&ldquo;I don't understand&rdquo;</dt>

<dd>If you don't know what's going on, maybe you should be typing.</dd>

</dl>

Although I expected these challenges, it was interesting to face them
head-on and get a feel for them. There's an itchy, restless feeling I
get when I'm bored, or ready to move on. I have to practice patience
then to be helpful to my partner. I'm not strongly tempted to backseat
drive, but I worry about being condescending, when questioning my
partner.

I look forward to next week's challenges.
