---
layout: post
title: "Unstyles"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
date: 2013-03-03 15:30 -0800
---
{% include JB/setup %}

A few weeks ago in <a href="http://portlandcodeschool.com">Portland
Code School</a> I learned that having a "normalized" or "reset"
stylesheet was "a thing." Something about this seemed familiar. 

<!-- more -->

Back when CSS3 was somewhat new, and I first tried to make websites, I
created a stylesheet to make your webpages mimic the interface with
the <a href="http://lynx.isc.org/">Lynx browser</a> (<a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynx_%28web_browser%29">wikipedia</a>). I
did it as kind of joke, but one of things that quickly became apparent
during testing was that I would need to specify styles for every html
element to make sure they were rendered the way I wanted.

To test the lynx stylesheet, I created a webpage which had every
element I found in the <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/">HTML
4.01</a> spec, including the depreciated ones, loaded up the test page
in both lynx and Firefox and fiddled about until it worked as well as
I could make it.

Due to a tragic mishap, I lost the test file and original sources of
my lynx stylesheet. I was able to recover the latest version though
and recently created a <a
href="https://github.com/wobh/Lynx-stylesheet">GitHub repo</a> for
further development.

<p>This got me thinking about the general purpose of "unstyling". Browsers, have to make their webpages look like something. In the case of Firefox, you can find a copy of the default CSS in your installation folder or here:<br/><br/>

<a href="http://mxr.mozilla.org/mozilla-central/source/layout/style/">http://mxr.mozilla.org/mozilla-central/source/layout/style/</a></p>


As nice as it is to have this around, a project like <a
href="http://nicolasgallagher.com/about-normalize-css/">normalize.css</a>
is still necessary to standardize all the other browsers. Which I find
really funny, in a bleakly philosophical way: Some minimal style is
necessary, to display at all, but almost no one will love it. 

We have this notion of "separating style from structure" which makes
me think of the classical dualism of form and substance. When we
suppose they may be separate, we may become confounded if challenged
to find, or even imagine a substance without a form. I feel like I
would less confounded if challenged to imagine a form without a
substance, but I suspect this to be a cultural artifact. I should feel
confounded either way.

But I digress.

I looked around for other information about reset.css and
normalize.css. Sixrevisions.com provides a nice <a
href="http://sixrevisions.com/css/the-history-of-css-resets/">history
of CSS reset</a> here along with other tutorials about priming your
webpages. Here's a couple of useful Stackoverflow discussions: <a
href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3485720/which-html5-reset-css-do-you-use-and-why">"Which
HTML5 reset CSS do you use and why?"</a> and <a
href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/6887336/what-is-the-difference-between-normalize-css-and-reset-css">What
is the difference between normalize.css and reset CSS"</a>.

We've advanced some way since lynx.css and the more radical unstyling
techniques have come into use. What's next? For myself, and lynx.css,
I think it would be amusing to modernize lynx.css for HTML5 and maybe
make a Jekyll theme when I have time.
